New York Times, Decemter 22, 2019, page 1.

Fighting the Good Fight Against Online Child Sexual Abuse

Several websites popular with sexual predators were thwarted last month
after a determined campaign by groups dedicated to eliminating the
content. It was a rare victory in an unending war.

By GABRIEL J.X. DANCE DEC. 22, 2019

In late November, the moderator of three highly trafficked websites posted
a message titled "R.I.P." It offered a convoluted explanation for why they
were left with no choice but to close.

The unnamed moderator thanked over 100,000 "brothers" who had visited and
contributed to the sites before their demise, blaming an "increasingly
intolerant world" that did not allow children to "fully express
themselves."

In fact, forums on the sites had been bastions of illegal content almost
since their inception in 2012, containing child sexual abuse photos and
videos, including violent and explicit imagery of infants and toddlers.
Exploited Articles in this series examine the explosion in online photos
and videos of children being sexually abused. They include graphic
descriptions of some instances of the abuse.

The sites managed to survive so long because the internet provides
enormous cover for sexual predators. Apps, social media platforms and
video games are also riddled with illicit material, but they have
corporate owners -- like Facebook and Microsoft -- that can monitor and
remove it.

In a world exploding with the imagery -- 45 million photos and videos of
child sexual abuse were reported last year alone -- the open web is a
freewheeling expanse where the underdog task of confronting the predators
falls mainly to a few dozen nonprofits with small budgets and outsize
determination.

Several of those groups, including a child exploitation hotline in Canada,
hunted the three sites across the internet for years but could never quite
defeat them. The websites, records show, were led by an experienced
computer programmer who was adept at staying one step ahead of his
pursuers -- in particular, through the services of American and other tech
companies with policies that can be used to shield criminal behavior.

But the Canadian hotline developed a tech weapon of its own, a
sophisticated tool to find and report illegal imagery on the web. When
the sites found the tool directed at them, they fought back with a smear
campaign, sending emails to the Canadian government and others with
unfounded claims of "grave operational and financial corruption" against
the nonprofit.

It wasn't enough. The three sites were overwhelmed by the Canadian tool,
which had sent more than 1 million notices of illegal content to the
companies keeping them online. And last month, they were compelled to
surrender.

"It's been a wonderful 7 years and we would've loved to go for another 7,"
the sites' moderator wrote in his final post, saying they had closed
because "antis," short for "anti-pedophiles," were "hunting us to death
with unprecedented zeal."

The victory was cheered by groups fighting online child sexual abuse, but
there were no illusions about the enormous undertaking that remained.
Thousands of other sites offer anybody with a web browser access to
illegal and depraved imagery of children, and unlike with apps, no special
software or downloads are required.

The three shuttered sites had hidden their tracks for years using the
services of Cloudflare, an American firm that provides companies with
cyberprotections. They also found a hosting company, Novogara, that gave
them safe harbor in the Netherlands -- a small country with a robust web
business and laws that are routinely exploited by bad actors.

Cloudflare's general counsel said the company had cooperated with the
nonprofits and law enforcement and cut ties with the sites seven times in
all, as they slightly altered their web addresses to evade targeting. A
spokesman for Novogara said the company had complied with Dutch law.

Last year, Europe eclipsed the United States as the top hosting location
for child abuse material on the open web, according to a report by Inhope,
a group that coordinates child abuse hotlines around the world. Within
Europe, the Netherlands led the list. To report online child sexual abuse
or find resources for those in need of help, contact the National Center
for Missing and Exploited Children at 1-800-843-5678.

In an interview in The Hague, the Dutch minister of justice, Ferdinand
Grapperhaus, said he was embarrassed by the role Dutch companies played.
"I had not realized the extent of cruelty, and how far it goes," he said.

When hotlines like the one in Canada learn about illegal imagery, they
issue a takedown notice to the owner of the website and its hosting
company. In most cases, the content is removed within hours or days from
law-abiding sites. But because the notices are not legally binding, some
owners and web hosts ignore or delay.

Several Dutch hosting companies will not voluntarily remove such content,
insisting that a judge decide whether it meets the legal definition of
so-called child pornography. Even when they agree, abuse imagery reappears
almost at once, setting the cycle back in motion.

The Dutch police say they do not have the resources to play what is
essentially an endless game of Whac-a-Mole with these companies, according
to Arda Gerkens, a Dutch senator who leads Meldpunt Kinderporno, the Dutch
child abuse hotline.

"It takes a lot of time," Ms. Gerkens said, "and basically, they are
swamped."

That means results like last month's, while relished by hotlines around
the world, are likely to remain rare. 

Our Little Community

The trio of shuttered websites first emerged in early 2012, according to
domain records and transcripts of online chats.

Their professed goal was to offer an easily accessible digital space for
pedophiles and sexual predators to indulge their twisted obsessions, which
had often been shunned even on notorious websites like 4chan and 8chan.

At least initially, the sites steered clear of imagery that was obviously
illegal, the records show, focusing instead on photos and videos of young
children posing in revealing clothing. Even so, the founder of the sites
identified in the transcripts expressed surprise in 2014 that they had
"lasted so long."

But the Canadians were already on to them. By then, the small hotline had
been alerted to dozens of illegal images on the websites.

As the sites gained in popularity, child sexual abuse content became more
and more common. The transcripts, which include over 10,000 time-stamped
messages on a chat app, show how the founder, a man identifying himself as
Avery Chicoine, reveled in the opportunity to interact with others who
shared his interests.

"What we got here," he wrote in 2015, "is our little community."

By 2017, the sites' home pages featured images of young girls that did not
legally qualify as child pornography in most countries but signaled that
there was plenty available a click away. One of the girls, no older than
7, lay on her back in sparse clothing with her legs spread; she had been a
victim of sexual abuse, according to the Canadians, and was easily
recognizable to predators through widely circulated imagery of the crimes.

As illegal material flooded the sites, so did visitors. SimilarWeb, which
measures internet traffic, estimated that the most popular of the sites
received millions of visits a month earlier this year from an average of
more than 500,000 unique visitors.

The moderator of the sites in recent months boasted about the traffic in a
series of emails and encrypted messages to The New York Times, attributing
the popularity to the extreme content.

The sites' many visitors were perhaps "the most hated people on earth," he
said, describing them as belonging to an "oppressed sexual minority." He
showed no remorse for their behavior, even casting the community of
predators as visionaries whose crimes should be made legal.

He did not identify himself and would not say if he was Mr. Chicoine -
the sites' founder, according to the chat transcripts - or if he knew him.
Last year, a Canadian by the name of Avery Chicoine with a lengthy
criminal record was arrested in British Columbia and charged with
possessing and distributing child pornography. The Canadian authorities
would not say whether the charges related to the websites. According to
court documents, he pleaded not guilty, and a trial is set for next month.
He and his lawyer did not respond to requests for comment.

The moderator would not address another pressing question: How had the
sites managed to stay ahead of its pursuers so long?

He said he did not want to hand a blueprint to his enemies, writing: "99%
of attempts to bring us down fail. So I want the antis to keep wasting 99%
of their time, instead of figuring out what works."

In the chat transcripts, however, there were clues about the sites'
evasion tactics. They pointed to a major cybersecurity firm, Cloudflare.

A High-Tech Hideaway

Based in San Francisco, Cloudflare built a billion-dollar business
shielding websites from cyberattacks. One of its most popular services -
used by 10 percent of the world's top sites, according to the company -
can hide clients' internet addresses, making it difficult to identify the
companies hosting them.

The protections are valuable to many legitimate companies but can also be
a boon to bad actors, though Cloudflare says it is not responsible for the
content on its clients' sites. The man accused of a mass shooting at a
Walmart in Texas had posted his manifesto on 8chan, an online message
board that had been using Cloudflare's services and was well known for
hosting hateful content. Cloudflare also came under criticism for
providing services to the neo-Nazi site The Daily Stormer. (The company
has since ended its relationship with both websites.)

In the chat transcripts, the man identifying as Mr. Chicoine showed he was
fully aware of the company's advantages when he signed on. "What
cloudflare does is it masks and replaces your IP with one of theirs," he
wrote in 2015, using the abbreviation for internet address.

That year, he appeared to panic when a child abuse hotline identified one
of his sites, telling a fellow moderator their operation was "finished."
But when he later realized the hotline had sent the report to Cloudflare -
and apparently not to the company that hosted the content - he seemed
relieved. "Wait," he wrote, "may be ok."

He was right.

One month later, he expressed exasperation that a hotline had fired off
another notice, this time to Cloudflare as well as the hosting company.
The hotline confirmed the report with The Times. Still, the sites remained
online.

Interviews and records show that Cloudflare's services helped hold off the
day of reckoning for Mr. Chicoine's sites by providing protections that
forced hotlines to go to the company first.

The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, the clearinghouse
for abuse imagery in the United States, had sent Cloudflare notices about
the sites starting in 2014, said John Shehan, a vice president at the
center. Last year, it sent thousands.

Even apart from the three sites, Mr. Shehan said, Cloudflare was well
known to be used by those who post such content. So far this year, he
said, the company had been named in 10 percent of reports about hosted
child sexual abuse material. The center is in touch with Cloudflare "every
day," Mr. Shehan said.

Separately, records kept by the Canadian hotline, known as the Canadian
Center for Child Protection, showed that since February 2017 there had
been over 130,000 reports about 1,800 sites protected by Cloudflare.

In December, the company was offering its services to 450 reported sites,
according to records reviewed by The Times.

Through its general counsel, Doug Kramer, Cloudflare said it worked
closely with hotlines and law enforcement officials and responded promptly
to their requests. It denied being responsible for the images, saying
customer data was stored on its servers only briefly. Efforts to eliminate
the content, the company said, should instead focus on the web-hosting
companies.

Records from the Canadian hotline revealed several cases in which abuse
material stayed on Cloudflare's servers even after the host company
removed it. In one instance, the imagery remained on Cloudflare for over a
week afterward, allowing predators to continue viewing it.

"The reality is that it is totally within Cloudflare�s power to remove
child sexual abuse material that they have on their servers," said Lloyd
Richardson, the technology director at the Canadian hotline.

Records show that for several years, the sites were clients of Cloudflare,
a U.S. tech company with servers in almost 200 cities in over 90 countries
around the world that can be used to ward off cyberattacks.

Cloudflare's protective services obscure a website's internet address.
When you visit a protected site, you are actually communicating with a
Cloudflare server located somewhere near you.

Somebody visiting a protected site from Oklahoma, for example, may be
directed to a Cloudflare server in Kansas City.

That server will communicate with the website's server in turn, but only
if it needs new information.

Often, Cloudflare will already have the information requested in its
systems.

This means that images of abuse can remain on Cloudflare, even if they
have been removed from the original host, according to records provided by
a hotline in Canada.

When asked why it did not cut ties with a number of companies known to
host child sexual abuse imagery, Mr. Kramer said Cloudflare was not in the
business of vetting customers' content. Doing so, he said, would have "a
lot of implications" and is "something that we really have not
entertained."

Still, he said, the company had stopped providing services over the past
eight years to more than 5,000 clients that had shared abuse material. And
on Wednesday, the company announced a new product - currently in
development - that would allow clients to scan their own sites.

The tension over Cloudflare's protections reflects a larger debate about
the balance between privacy on the internet and the need of law
enforcement to protect exploited children. For example, Facebook's recent
decision to encrypt its Messenger app, the largest source of reports last
year about abuse imagery, was hailed by privacy advocates but would make
it much more difficult for the authorities to catch sexual predators.

Addressing that broad tension, Matt Wright, a special agent with the
Department of Homeland Security, said law enforcement and the tech
industry needed to find "a mutual balance" - "one where companies intended
to secure data, and protect privacy, don't get in the way of our need to
have access to critical information intended to safeguard the public,
investigate crimes and prevent future criminal activity."

Going Rogue in the Netherlands

There were other clues about the sites' ability to stay online, in a trail
of activity across the web that led to the Netherlands. Internet
criminals come from far and wide to leverage Dutch technology, some of the
best in the world, for the purposes of spam, malware and viruses. They do
this by using rogue hosting companies, which are infamously uncooperative
except in response to legal requests.

"I realize that because we have such excellent internet logistics, we now
have it on our plate," said Mr. Grapperhaus, the country's minister of
justice.

For child abuse sites like the ones identified as Mr. Chicoine's, a top
draw has been the company Novogara, formerly known as Ecatel, one of the
country's most criticized hosting businesses.

The Chicoine sites were hosted on Novogara's servers for all of 2018 and
through the early part of this year, records show. While working with the
company, and without Cloudflare's protections at the time, the sites came
under increasing pressure from the Canadians. Their hotline, along with at
least four others around the world, stepped up their offensive, issuing
hundreds of thousands of more reports about abuse imagery.

The number was so great, according to the Dutch and Canadian hotlines,
that Novogara blocked the groups' email addresses to avoid receiving
additional notices. Ultimately, though, the targeting was effective:
Novogara pulled the plug on the sites in May.

Aside from sites like Mr. Chicoine's, the Dutch have an even larger
problem with sexual predators taking advantage of platforms used to upload
and share images. Since June, a company that hosts those platforms,
NFOrce, has appeared in more than half of reports the Dutch hotline has
received about illegal imagery. Over the past three years, sites using
NFOrce servers have received more than 100,000 notices of illegal content,
records show, but the company has not removed the material, according to
Ms. Gerkens, who leads the hotline.

NFOrce's sales operations manager, Dave Bakvis, said the company's hands
were tied by Dutch laws, which prevent it from monitoring customer servers
without a court order. He said NFOrce acted immediately when it received
requests from the authorities. Separately, the websites themselves can
and do remove the content.

"I hate child pornography," Mr. Bakvis said.

The Dutch national prosecutor for cybercrimes, Martijn Egberts, said in an
email that issues involving "sovereignty" and "jurisdiction" complicated
the removal of illegal material - leading the authorities to cooperate "as
much as possible" with web hosts to get results.

Legislation is now being drafted that would require Dutch web hosts to
keep the material out of their systems, essentially forcing to them to
scan for it. If a company falls short, it could face ever-increasing
fines.

Ben van Mierlo, the national police coordinator for online child sexual
exploitation, said in an email that companies like Novogara "see
themselves as a provider of a service." The challenge for the Dutch
authorities and lawmakers, he said, was to convert them into partners in
preventing the spread of illegal imagery.

"There is no space in the Netherlands for those individuals or companies
that threaten these basic rights for children," Mr. van Mierlo said.

The Final Assault

By May of this year, the moderator of the three sites was apoplectic,
complaining in an email to The Times that "tolerance" for his views was
coming to a halt.

Over the next several months, the sites hopscotched around the world,
finding more than a half-dozen new hosts - to pick up where Novogara left
off - in Denmark, Russia, the Seychelles and elsewhere. For years, they
had deployed a similar tactic of changing the last part of their web
address - moving from .com to .org, for example - to avoid being targeted 
and blocked. Companies and governments that provide these domains often 
do not coordinate with one another, allowing offenders to move around the 
globe while largely preserving their site's identity.

But there was no hiding this time.

Records reviewed by The Times show that over seven years, the websites
were directed to servers in over 20 countries, many of which are shown
here.

A borderless internet means bad actors can move their sites between
countries, and even continents, in seconds.

This complicates the work of child abuse hotlines and law enforcement
agencies trying to eradicate images of child sexual abuse.

The Canadian hotline, working from offices in Winnipeg, Manitoba, were
using a computer program named Arachnid to crawl the internet in search of
Mr. Chicoine's sites, and to send takedown notices whenever it identified
illegal material.

And as soon as the three sites reappeared somewhere, the Canadians reached
out to the new hosts. In all, they found more than 18,000 confirmed images
of abuse on the pages, reporting most of them hundreds of times each. It
is also possible that law enforcement officials directed their firepower
at the sites.

Signy Arnason, the associate executive director of the Canadian center,
described Arachnid as a "survivor-centric" endeavor, inspired by a survey
that found victims of child sexual abuse feared being recognized in person
by those who had viewed their abuse online.

Since its launch two years ago, Arachnid has found more than 1.6 million
confirmed images of child sexual abuse, and has sent more than 4.8 million
takedown notices to websites and hosting providers. The British child
sexual abuse hotline, the Internet Watch Foundation, has also developed a
"spider" to crawl the internet. New software drove a surge in takedown
requests

Starting in 2013, abuse hotlines around the world sent a trickle of
requests to remove images on the three sites - with little effect.
Arachnid automated the detection process, creating a deluge that couldn't
be ignored.

"Arachnid is one oar - a big oar - in a ship of many oars rowing against
this issue," said Denton Howard, executive director of Inhope, the
organization supporting child abuse hotlines.

Throughout the battle, the moderator of the sites would email the
Canadians, accusing them of corruption and filling their inboxes with
spam. He also contacted Canadian government agencies with false claims
about the center, and even built software that altered the child sexual
abuse imagery, hoping to trick Arachnid into skipping it over.

It was not enough. All imagery of abuse has been removed from the sites,
and the forums for the predators are closed, at least while their
opponents have the upper hand.

But as a parting shot, the home pages were filled with links to other
sites that offered similar content, giving criminals a road map to
continue their pursuits - and the groups dedicated to stopping them a list
of new targets.

Michael H. Keller contributed reporting from New York.

Produced by Rich Harris, Virginia Lozano and Rumsey Taylor.

END
